This is an interview with Dr. Glenn Hallmark,
retired head of the Department of Electrical
Engineering at Texas A&M. Today's date is
September 24, 1981. Let's begin, Dr. Hallmark, by
your telling us something about your early years
in Killeen. You were born there in 1913. Born there
in 1913 and lived, I believe, until 1920 in Killeen
and then moved to Delta. nearby
until I began high school. And then, through high
school years, I lived in Houston and Waco. What
happened to you? What was your father's
occupation? He was a cotton buyer for a major
cotton exporting company. And that's why
you moved? Uh, no.
The several moves during high school took place
after my father's death. He died about the time I
started high school. What about your mother?
Well, my mother lived until 1963.
After your father died, how did your mother
support the family? Well, we had four children,
all of us, and the four children worked. When did
you start working? No, I worked in
high school. I didn't contribute a great deal
while I was in high school, but I worked in high
school and college. By that time, the other kids
were older than I. They were working and helped. It
was a family undertaking. We all went to college.
That was not unusual in those days. What year did
your father die? 1927.
Where did you graduate from high school? In
Abilene. What was the name of the school? There was
only one high school in Abilene, and it might have
had a name, but I don't remember. It was Abilene
High School. What year was that? 1930. And after
graduation from high school, what did you do? Then
I entered A&M. What year? Electrical
engineering. You got your degree, bachelor's
degree at A&M? Yes. In what year? 35. Tell me about
what the school was like when you were there as a
student in the early 30s. Well, A&M was a small
military boys college. I guess we had about 3,000
students during most of my time here.
This was during the well-known depression, and
times were pretty hard, and so the enrollment was a
little smaller, I guess, than
it had been. But it was the only kind of university,
the only kind of college that I knew, so I can't
compare it very much at that time with anything
else. Why did you decide to go to A&M? because my
brother went to A&M before me, I think. How did you
have an interest in electrical engineering? How
did this develop? Oh, this developed as a child,
through the years as a child, and I was very, very
certain of what I wanted to do and what I was
interested in. Was electrical engineering a
relatively new field when you entered it, or had it
been around for a while? No, it wasn't a new field. I
think electrical engineering The electrical
engineering department at A&M began around 1910
or 1911.
So I would consider
it a new field. Pretty well established. One of the
newer engineering fields, of course, but pretty
well established. How did the Depression affect
you and your family?
I think not a great deal
because the depression started two or three years
after my father's death.
I think our situation didn't change as much during
the depression as lots
of other people. reasonably hard time, but the
older kids in the family were working.
And so that took care of the rest of us. Was there any
resentment on their part of having to work to
support the rest of the family? Probably.
Not really. I don't think that's so...
When did you get your master's degree? In 1946 or
47. Where did you get it? At Enid. What did you do
then after you got your bachelor's? After I got my
bachelor's degree, I worked for the city of Mahea,
a little town up north. MEXIA. MEXIA as city
engineer. six or seven years. And just before
World War II started, I went to work for the State
Parks Board as an engineer. In Austin. In Austin.
And then immediately after the start of World War
II, someone here at the university, I think it was
the head of the electrical engineering
department at the university, invited me to come
back here and teach in the Naval Training School,
which was a training program for electronic
technicians for the Navy. It was a pre-radar
training program. operated by the university,
operated by the college before the Navy. So I came
back just very soon after the war started and began
teaching in this Naval Training School. I spent
the rest of the war here. And what about while you
were in Maheo? How was Maheo affected by the
Depression? Oh, it was hard hit. By the Depression
and every other thing you can think of, Maheo had
been a hog in the town. Beginning in 19... and this
began to play out in the late 20s just in time for the
depression to start and almost finish off the
town. Does that town have a large number of Mexican
Americans because of its name? No. It doesn't? No.
That has nothing to do with it? Well, the name came
from The person who received the land grant from
the Mexican, from the Texas government, I guess,
who was a Mexican in that area, General Mejia. The
town was named after
him. Okay. Tell me a little something about when
you were with the State Parks Board in Austin.
Well, I traveled most of the time. At that time,
primarily we were involved in maintaining the
state parks and kind of mothballing them for the
period of war
that was coming up. So, there wasn't much
construction or planning or anything like that,
but it was realized that travel was going to be
curtailed, the parks were not going to be used very
much. Some of the parks were built by the Civilian
Conservation Corps, the CCC, and this was
terminated. And so much of my job was finishing up
what they had left undone and getting the parks
ready to ride out the period of not very much use.
Were any parks built during this time? None were
built as far as I know. There were two or three parks
under construction when the war started. Big Bend
State Park was one. It was a state park at that time.
It's a national park now, but it was...
Yeah, the Big Bend Park was under construction by
the CCC camp, and when the CCC camp shut down, They
just walked off and left their tools and left
everything half-finished. And it would have been
subject to a considerable deterioration without
some work done on it to protect it from the other
ones. So I spent some time, I spent six weeks living
down there in the Jesus Mountains at that time with
my wife and my boy. When did you marry? Oh, in 1939.
But that job didn't last very long. was the
traveling became too much of a problem. So I was
very glad to come here to A&M and interested in some
kind of teaching. I just had a BS degree so it was
equivalent to a technical institute type of
program. What year did you come back to A&M? 1940. I
believe the war started in 1941, December 1941,
and I came back in 1942. You were here throughout
the war? Yes. Okay. How was the school affected by
World War II? Oh, the school. We didn't have any
students. We didn't have any civilian students.
Practically none. And the school was maintained
by this Naval Training School, which was a pretty
big operation. Two training schools. One for
electronic technicians, that's the one I was
involved in. The other was for radio operators,
which was really
just technical training. We had probably, I don't
remember the numbers, but we had 2,500 sailors
here all the time throughout until right at the end
of the war in training. The Navy paid for their paid
the costs of their training here and I'm sure that
the university, well the university did profit
from this. Well enough to pay the overhead and
upkeep of the college and so forth here at this
time. These programs were supervised and run by
the electrical engineering department. I got my
master's
degree and left in 1946, I
believe, to South Carolina. I taught at Clemson
College in South Carolina. Clemson is a college,
very much like any of the small boys military
school. The nature of the college, just like any
land grant college, taught the same programs, the
same kind of school at that time. Not quite as
large, but essentially the same. I was over there
until 1950. In what capacity? Some level of
instructor in the electrical engineering
department. I guess I was an assistant professor.
I think I was an assistant professor over there.
Clemson was very similar to A&M in its outlook and
procedures. Very similar. Why did you leave
Clemson? get a Ph.D. a year. I came back the end of it
and got a Ph.D. in electrical engineering. Were
you one of those who were able to get a Ph.D. while
they were teaching here? Well, no, I came back with
a graduate assistantship
and was a graduate assistant for a couple of years
and was almost through with my Ph.D. And I believe I
was offered a position on the faculty just before I
got the degree. What year did you get the
education? 53, I believe. What was the subject of
your dissertation or service? It had to do with
mass spectrometry.
Would you spell that?
M-A-S-S-P-E-C-T-R-O-N-E-T-R-Y.
It's a subject. Then
you became an associate professor of electrical
engineering in 1953. I'm not quite sure of the
title. You held that position until you became
department head. Somewhere in between these
times I was promoted to a professor. When did you
become department head? In 1957. I believe it was
1957. When you became department head,
about how many faculty members were under your
supervision? I think we had about 20. Was most of
the emphasis on teaching or research or a mixture?
Primarily teaching. When did research become an
important aspect of academic work? Well, the
emphasis was increased
fairly steadily over this period from 19, I guess
the middle 19, beginning of the 1950s. Emphasis
was increasingly put on research.
Well
that's hard to say. Well that gave a big boost to the
research effort, of course. I think emphasis was
put on research because to
do this
for competitive reasons with other
universities. What were some of the research
endeavors that were undertaken when you were
department head? program, a beginning,
beginnings of a research program in radar,
weather radar, in association with Oceanography
Department and Meteorology Department.
program in control systems and these were built
around individuals of course individuals do
research this was not something that the
electrical engineering department did but we had
individuals who were involved in researching
control systems
electromagnetic theory radiation and
propagation
network
theory. These are things I remember right now.
When you were department head in the late 50s,
about how many students were there in the medical
engineering department?
Well, those figures could be looked up, and I don't
really remember, but I expect it were four or five
hundred. When you left as department head, do you
remember how much it had increased? Yeah, it had
grown some. Well, this four or five hundred is the
kind of average figure that I remember. I guess it
grew about fifty percent during the nine years
that I was department head. You were department
head from 57 to 66? Nine years, I believe.
How are the students in the late 50s and early 60s in
comparison with some of the earlier students that
you had been, that you
had encountered? Well, I think in the early, in the
50s we were still getting veteran students from
World War II who were very serious.
dedicated students. That is, they knew what they
wanted to do and they had goals
and they stuck with those goals. About in the late
50s, the nature of the students changed some
because we got less of these veteran students and
more youngsters just out of high school.
And about that
time,
I think the quality of the high school students
began to improve some. So there was a difference in
maturity. This is about the only thing I can
remember. They were younger and they did not have
as well-defined
goals in what they were.
but I think we always got pretty capable students.
I don't have much, I don't want to say anything that
detracts from the capability of the students we
had. While you were in the department, were there
ever any women students in Electrical
Engineering? Well, in the latter year, in the last
year or two,
We had one or two. They were just beginning. Most of
the years, women weren't allowed to enroll in
that. And I think we did have one or two women
teachers, but women weren't
allowed to enroll in it, too. Sometime, like the
mid-60s, I've forgotten how to tell you for sure.
We did have one or two. After you stepped down as
department head in 1966 and stayed on until 1976
when you retired.
While you were in the department, were there any
very many flags that drove an electable Indian
hearing? Well, not any significant numbers,
maybe one or two while I was department head. But
after that time in the 70s, we had several. Not
a big percentage,
but we had several. Why do you think that there have
been revenue blacks who have enrolled in any
aspect of engineering? You don't really want me to
answer that, do you? No, you don't. Well, let's
strike that for the record. Okay, have electrical
engineers always commanded the high salary
levels that they do today? In a relative way, yeah.
As long as I can remember, electrical engineers
have had a
little bit higher beginning salaries than
average for engineering.
And this goes back as far as I can remember. Have
there ever been any years in which there were
rather few jobs for electrical engineers? Oh,
yeah, when I graduated in the 30s. Back in the 30s.
Except for that, they've always had good
selections.
I believe that's correct.
Probably. More than half the class when I
graduated in those years did not go into the field
of electrical
engineering. Some field allied to electrical
engineering maybe, but there weren't very many
jobs in the engineering area in the 30's.
Of course the war changed over there.
Let's discuss the faculty when you were
department head. Was there a feeling of
camaraderie among the faculty members? Very
much. It was a close-knit family. Do you think this
has changed over the years? Yes, it's changed over
the years. The department has gotten much bigger,
a different kind of faculty, and it has changed
very much.
At the time I was department head, the faculty had
not had any great growth, and most of us had worked
together for
a good many years. I had been here several years,
was here as a student, and so we were close in that
group.
these faculty members under your program
supervision, what
were some of the schools that they had come from?
Oh, that's hard for me to remember. We had a larger
than would be desirable number of A&M graduates,
but we had graduates from Cornell,
Clemson in South Carolina.
One of the universities
in North Carolina,
I've forgotten which one. Several who did
undergraduate work. Now these are newer faculty
members that joined the faculty in the 50s and the
60s. who did undergraduate work here and then went
to
other
universities for graduate study, Wisconsin,
Illinois. Let's see, we had one of our faculty
members from Purdue, University of Texas. A
mixture of schools, many of them were schools in
the South,
You've seen a number of, since you've been at A&M,
you've seen a number of different governors in
Texas. Have there been any difference in some of
these governors in regard to the degree of support
they've given A&M? Well I couldn't answer that
because I never was at a level in the university
that had any dealings with the governor or the
legislature. Yeah,
I
think we were, I think we were in the upper ranks of
the electrical engineering departments in the
south, not at the top of the upper ranks. What were
some of the other students
in
those upper ranks? Well, I mentioned University
of Texas, Georgia Tech, Rice.
I can think of some more. And I feel like we were not
quite at the level of those schools. Facilities
and faculty and program,
these kinds of
things. And why did you step down as a department?
Because of ill health. And you stayed on for 10 more
years as a professor? Yeah. The ill health of the
dean said I made him sick.
While you were still in the department, as a
professor, the Vietnam War was underway. Could
you say how any of this affected Texas A&M? I don't
think it had very much effect on Texas A&M.
There was of course a reduction in students
because of the large number involved in the war,
but we didn't grow much and we didn't lose much
during the Vietnam War. The biggest impact of the
Vietnam War was dissension on campuses over the
country and we had very little of that here. Why do
you suppose that happened? It's the nature of the
Vietnam War. and I think good administration of
the university
at that time. Were there any other universities in
Texas that had any problems on campuses during the
Vietnam War? As I remember, there were some
demonstrations and some problems at other
universities. But there weren't, to your
knowledge, there weren't even any
demonstrations that they had? I can't remember
anything that I'd seriously consider a
demonstration.
How did the university change when you retired in
1976 compared to when you became a full-time
personnel and teaching back in 1953? During those
23 years, what was something wrong? How had the
university changed?
Well, before I retired A&M had begun admitting
women and had made ROTC optional, but not very long
before. And these were just beginning to have an
impact on the university when I retired. And over
the next ten years they have a tremendous impact on
the university. character of the university.
What about the quality of students? By the early
and mid seventies, how did they contrast with the
previous quality of students? Well, I think the
students were a better group of fellows,
increasingly better as time went on. From the time
I began to know something about their background
and records. What do you think that is when the
public has an image that the quality of students
has steadily decreased over
the years? Well perhaps there are two reasons for
that. One is I think the public's perception might
not be correct and the other is I think our higher
the quality of students that came to A&M improved
over the years relative to general development.
In other words, many of these slower learners
didn't come to A&M. I expect this is so.
Well, I know that our admissions
raised the quality of the students over this
period. We got better.
with better backgrounds. Increasingly as time
went on, probably this is still increasing now.
What were some of the research endeavors in
mechanical engineering at the time you were
retiring in the mid-seventies and running away at
the time?
I guess the biggest research effort was in
semiconductor devices.
general area of transistors and applications of
these things that were beginning in the late,
beginning with us in the Middle 60s and have
continued on since
then. We had started a research program funded
principally by Texas Instruments in this area
sort of in its beginning stages
when I was replaced and has increased importantly
since
then. This has been a big thing, you know, the
last 20 years. Have you remained professionally
active since you retired in 1976? Not really. My
interest has been a hobby interest since I
retired. In what capacity? Oh, I'm a ham radio
operator and I'm a computer buff. These are areas
that I was interested in throughout my
professional career as they came along. You've
been retired for five years. What are some of the
things you've done to keep busy besides these two
particular hobbies? That keeps me busy.
Those are pretty, those are hobbies that one can
spend as much time as you want to and
put it off when you need to.
Do you have any regrets about your career at Texas
A&M? I enjoyed it thoroughly. I think it's
wonderful. Would you have done anything
differently if you had it to do over?
Well, if I could start it over again at 68 years old,
I'd know some things to do differently. As I went
along, I did the things that I thought were the
right thing. I might still think they were the
right thing.
Do you ever run across any of your former students?
Oh, yeah. Any place you go in the state, some of the
other professors have said that no matter where
they go, they run across the former students. Most
places you go, you do, if you're there very long,
you run across somebody.
I run across more of them who just stop by
occasionally, passing through here. Many of them
do, some of them do.
Do you think whether the student was smaller than
the faculty members or more personal interest in
the students than they have since they became a
larger university?
Well yes, I expect that's true. I think you would
expect that. Certainly we knew our students
better than we
do now. What about your children? Did you have a
son? We have one son, yes. Where does he live? He's
in Phoenix, in the Phoenix area. In what capacity?
He works for computer
companies out there. And like lots of these
people, he changes around from one to another. Is
there anything else we need to touch on? Any
observations you had about your career? Oh, I
can't, you asked me if I'd enjoyed my time here at
A&M, I think, and I have tremendously. I think it
was a fine career, but I think I, I feel like I lived
in the golden age of my career, and looking back at
the things that have happened during, well, from
the time I graduated college until now, you can't
believe advances that have taken place, the
rapidity with which these advances have taken
place, and things that to me just seem absolutely
wonderful. Starting with the development of,
pretty much the development of radio
communication in the 1930s, and the great strides
that were made during World War II
communications and electronic devices during
that time, which later were applied to civilian
use. Development of television
in the 50s, primarily, and beginning in 1948.
Announcement
or discovery of the transistor by Bell
Laboratories. This revolutionized the whole
electrical industry.
years. Progress made strides
that took us 50 years up until that time. All these
things, all these things now since 1950 that
depend
on applications and offshoots of the transistor
Absolutely new to us
old guys, you know, school before that time. But I
think it's been tremendous and exciting and fun to
keep up with. And you can believe this because this
is now my hobby after I retired from this career. I
still find it fascinating and hard to believe.
Thank you very much for taking the time to talk with
me. You bet. Glad you came by.